feat(docs): Documenting noir codegen (#4454)
noir-lang/noir: docs/docs/getting_started/tooling/noir_codegen.md

---
title: Noir Codegen for Typescript
description: Learn how to use Noir codegen to generate Typescript bindings 
keywords: [Nargo, Noir, compile, TypeScript]
sidebar_position: 2
---

You can generate TypeScript bindings with `noir_codegen`, allowing for easier and faster integration of your Noir circuits into TypeScript projects.

> It is used in conjunction with `nargo export` which generates JSON for specified functions.

Reviewer: Is this a new command? I don't see it documented on the commands page, or in the CLI help

![image](https://github.com/noir-lang/noir/assets/18372439/9a232daf-bffc-4167-b696-96becefddda8)

Reviewer 2: The "specified functions" part is correct, but doesn't say how (here or later). Will add below.

## Installation

You can install `noir_codegen` into your project using `yarn` or `npm`:

```bash
yarn add @noir-lang/noir_codegen
```

or 

```bash
npm install @noir-lang/noir_codegen
```
## Usage

### Export circuit ABI

Before generating TypeScript bindings, you need to export your Noir programs using `nargo export`:

```bash

> nargo export

Reviewer: I am running `nargo export` in the dir with my Nargo.toml, using today's nightly. 
![image](https://github.com/noir-lang/noir/assets/18372439/fee66699-6558-4c9d-9ed1-ed7cb798dbd8)

![image](https://github.com/noir-lang/noir/assets/18372439/195f81d7-dbf8-435c-b4c8-0cd351c46f8d)

It doesn't generate any files. Any ideas?

Reviewer 2: Ended up fleshing out the doc. `nargo export` works only for libs with functions marked with `#[export]` macro.
Added details about how .json files are generated and consolidated in a single .ts file using the noir-codegen module.

---
title: Noir Codegen for Typescript
description: Learn how to use Noir codegen to generate Typescript bindings 
keywords: [Nargo, Noir, compile, TypeScript]
sidebar_position: 2
---

> You can generate TypeScript bindings with `noir_codegen`, allowing for easier and faster integration of your Noir circuits into TypeScript projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For most development flows, you will want want to know the outputs of your circuit in an easy, programmable way. Some devs use external libraries for this, which are often hard to find (ex. for `Poseidon2` hashes) or unmaintained (ex. `circomlibjs`).

To help you, `noir_codegen` turns Noir circuits into TypeScript projects. It takes whatever Noir function you have and turns it into a TS bind you can run and see its output.
```

Reviewer 2: I'll update to include some of this additional context.

> It is used in conjunction with `nargo export` which generates JSON for specified functions in a Noir library (not binary or contract circuits).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are two steps to this process. First, you will run `nargo export`, which compiles the JSON for decorated functions. And then, you will install and use `noir_codegen` which outputs the TS file.

:::warning

This process only works for Nargo _libraries_, i.e. the ones with `type = "lib"` in their `Nargo.toml` file. Binaries or contracts are not supported.

:::
```

Reviewer 2: Similarly I'll clarify this a little more.

## Installation

> You can install `noir_codegen` into your project using `yarn` or `npm`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Make sure you have Nargo installed. If you don't, follow the [installation guide](../installation/index.md). You can then install `noir_codegen`. 

You can do so globally, which will allow you to use it everywhere, with:

\`\`\`
npm i -g @noir-lang/noir_codegen
\`\`\`

or you can do it in your TS project with `yarn` or `npm`:
```

```bash
yarn add @noir-lang/noir_codegen
```

or 

```bash
npm install @noir-lang/noir_codegen
```
## Usage

### Export ABI of specified functions

Use the `#[export]` macro to indicate which functions in the noir library that you'd like to export.
```rust
#[export]
fn your_function(...
```

> The following command, when run from the directory with `Nargo.toml`, will create a folder with a .json file per exported function:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At the root of your project, run:

\```
nargo export
\```

This will create a folder "exports" with a .json file per exported function.
```

> ```bash

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> nargo export

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> The .json files live in a new `exports` directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> You can also specify the directory of Noir programs using `--program-dir` as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you're not at the root, you can specify the directory of Noir programs using `--program-dir`:
```

```bash
nargo export --program-dir=./path/to/your/noir/program
```

### Run noir-codegen 

> The `noir-codegen` command, pass the path of your exported JSON file(s) (wildcard characters accepted too, `*.json`). :

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You should now have a folder "exports" with your compiled function. To turn it into a TS binding, we will use the `noir-codegen` package we installed.

If you installed it globally, just pass the path of your exported JSON file(s) (you can use wildcards too, ex. `*.json`). :
```

```bash
yarn noir-codegen ./export/your_function.json
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you installed it in an existing JS project, you probably want to add it to a `package.json` script, for example:

\```json
// ....
"scripts": {
    "codegen": "noir-codegen ./export/*.json",
    //...
 }
\```

You can then run it as part of your JS development flow (ex.`yarn codegen && yarn start`)

```

> An `exports` directory is created with an index.ts file containing all exported functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A `codegen` directory is created with an index.ts file containing all exported functions.
```

> You can optionally specify an output dir for your Typescript bindings to live with `--out-dir`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can specify a different output dir as well with `--out-dir`:
```

```bash
yarn noir-codegen ./export/*.json --out-dir ./path/to/output/dir
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can now run your TS file, which will return the output of your decorated Noir function.
```

## Example

For example, if you have a Noir program like this:

```rust
struct MyStruct {
    foo: bool,
    bar: [str<5>; 3],
    baz: Field
}

struct NestedStruct {
    foo: MyStruct,
    bar: [MyStruct; 3],
    baz: u64
}
#[export]
fn exported_function_foo(x: u64, y: u64, array: [u8; 5], my_struct: NestedStruct, string: str<5>) -> (u64, u64, MyStruct) {
    assert(array.len() == 5);
    assert(my_struct.foo.foo);
    assert(string == "12345");

    print(x);
    assert(x < y);
    (x + y, 3, my_struct.foo)
}

fn unexported_function(x: u64, y: u64) {
    assert(x != y);
}
```

> After following the usage instructions, you will have an `index.ts` that looks like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can run `nargo export` followed by `noir-codegen` (assuming you installed it globally), and you'll see an `index.ts` file similar to:
```

Reviewer 2: I'll rephrase, but not lean into the global again.

```typescript
/* Autogenerated file, do not edit! */

/* eslint-disable */

import { Noir, InputMap, CompiledCircuit, ForeignCallHandler } from "@noir-lang/noir_js"

export { ForeignCallHandler } from "@noir-lang/noir_js"

export type u64 = string;
export type u8 = string | number;
export type Field = string;

export type MyStruct = {
  foo: boolean;
  bar: string[];
  baz: Field;
};

export type NestedStruct = {
  foo: MyStruct;
  bar: MyStruct[];
  baz: u64;
};

> export const exported_function_foo_circuit: CompiledCircuit = {"abi":{"parameters":[{"name":"x","type":{"kind":"integer","sign":"unsigned","width":64},"visibility":"private"},{"name":"y","type":{"kind":"integer","sign":"unsigned","width":64},"visibility":"private"},{"name":"array","type":{"kind":"array","length":5,"type":{"kind":"integer","sign":"unsigned","width":8}},"visibility":"private"},{"name":"my_struct","type":{"kind":"struct","path":"NestedStruct","fields":[{"name":"foo","type":{"kind":"struct","path":"MyStruct","fields":[{"name":"foo","type":{"kind":"boolean"}},{"name":"bar","type":{"kind":"array","length":3,"type":{"kind":"string","length":5}}},{"name":"baz","type":{"kind":"field"}}]}},{"name":"bar","type":{"kind":"array","length":3,"type":{"kind":"struct","path":"MyStruct","fields":[{"name":"foo","type":{"kind":"boolean"}},{"name":"bar","type":{"kind":"array","length":3,"type":{"kind":"string","length":5}}},{"name":"baz","type":{"kind":"field"}}]}}},{"name":"baz","type":{"kind":"integer","sign":"unsigned","width":64}}]},"visibility":"private"},{"name":"string","type":{"kind":"string","length":5},"visibility":"private"}],"param_witnesses":{"array":[{"start":2,"end":7}],"my_struct":[{"start":7,"end":76}],"string":[{"start":76,"end":81}],"x":[{"start":0,"end":1}],"y":[{"start":1,"end":2}]},"return_type":{"abi_type":{"kind":"tuple","fields":[{"kind":"integer","sign":"unsigned","width":64},{"kind":"integer","sign":"unsigned","width":64},{"kind":"struct","path":"MyStruct","fields":[{"name":"foo","type":{"kind":"boolean"}},{"name":"bar","type":{"kind":"array","length":3,"type":{"kind":"string","length":5}}},{"name":"baz","type":{"kind":"field"}}]}]},"visibility":"private"},"return_witnesses":[83,84,85,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23]},"bytecode":"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"};

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
export const exported_function_foo_circuit: CompiledCircuit = {"abi":{"paramet.......(truncated for readability)
```

Reviewer 2: Will truncate to a smaller example, and preserve the params and return type for visibility.
